---
layout: post
title:  "Leetcode 167: Two Sum II"
date:   2021-10-10 12:20:00 -0500
categories: Programming Problems
tags: Python Arrays Leetcode
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

Given an array of non-unique sorted integers, find the unique pair of numbers which add up to a target number.

This is a pretty easy problem to work through. I didn't spend too long with it and found a handful of solutions, some
more efficient than others.

<!--more-->

## Preamble

I've recently been trying to dedicate some time each week working on programming challenges or personal projects.
Finding time to code outside of work can sometimes be a challenge, but I've found it refreshing to be able to sit
down for 20-30 minutes and write some code unrelated to my job. It's definitely something I want to try to do more 
often.

After I'd worked through a couple of these problems, I felt it would be a good to write them up as full walkthroughs.
While these challenges are often more abstract that real world problems, they are still fun and interesting to work 
through. Often I find myself forced to explore new ideas and techniques that I may not regularly come across.

[Click Here](https://leetcode.com/problems/two-sum-ii-input-array-is-sorted/){:target="_blank"} to go to the problem to 
see it for yourself

## The Solution

The first step to working through a problem is to lay out all the information we have about the problem, and think about
exactly how it relates to the problem at hand.

1. We are given an array with a length >= 2.

    This means we don't need to worry about handling cases where the array is empty, or only contains one integer.

2. The integers will be between -1000 and 1000.

    This means that the solution must be able to handle negative integers too.

3. We cannot use the same integer twice.

    So our solution will consist of something like 3 + 3 = 6.

4. The array is sorted in non-descending order.

    Aside from the obvious that the array will be sorted for us, here it is important to note that the array is will be in a
    *non-descending* order. This is not the same as an *ascending* order, as it includes the possibility for adjacent numbers
    to be duplicates.

5. The arrays are generated in a way to ensure exactly one solution.

    This makes our life a bit easier as we don't have to worry about edge cases for arrays that don't have a solution, or
    that have multiple.

Now that we have these attributes in mind, we can start to come up with a number of approaches. A piece of advice I 
heard recently which I think is very useful here is that you need to try keep everything very high level at this stage.
It can be tempting to dive in and start coding an approach as soon as you think it will work, but a lot of the
time this can result in you wasting time on a sub-optimal solution. I think it's better to leave your hands off the 
keyboard until you feel like you've fully considered at least a couple of alternatives.

### Bruteforce approach

Let's start out simple. One way we could approach this problem is to just try every combination of 2 integers until we
find the two that add up to the target. To provide an example, let's say we are given a target number of `6`, with 
`[1, 2, 2, 3, 3, 4]` as our array.

First we would start with the first number in the array, in this case `1`. The we would try adding it to every other
number in the array to see if we find our target.

```
1 + 2 = 3
1 + 2 = 3
1 + 3 = 4
1 + 3 = 4
1 + 4 = 5
```

As we haven't found our target yet, we move onto the next number. At this point we also don't need to worry about trying
numbers earlier in the array, as we've already tried those.

```
2 + 2 = 4
2 + 3 = 5
2 + 3 = 5
2 + 4 = 6! -> This is the correct pair
```

And now that we have found our pair of numbers we would just need to return their positions in the array and that would
be our solution. While this solution is correct, it is certainly not the most efficient. If we take the case where the
two target numbers are positioned in the last two indices of the array we would be required to iterate through every 
number up to `n-1`, and from that number, iterate through every number from `i` to `n`, where `i` is the current 
index.

This results in a time complexity of `O(n log n)` for this solution. There is no correlation between the length of the
array, and the amount of space we need to use for this approach, therefore the space complexity is constant `O(1)`.

### Binary Search Approach
Once I had a brute force approach planned out, I started to think of where it could potentially be optimized. The first
approach simply tried every possibility, Maybe it would make more sense to figure out what the second number
would need to be to achieve the target, then look for it in the remainder of the array.

As the array is already sorted, this makes it a pretty good candidate for a binary search algorithm. I'll probably
do a more detailed post on this algorithm in the future, but for now I'll just assume some level of familiarity and 
apply it to a walk through the same example as before. 
([Click here for more information on Binary Search](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_search_algorithm){:target="_blank"})

First step is to figure out what number we need to search for to get our target. In this case, `6 - 1 = 5`. Next we 
perform a binary search on the rest of the array to try to find 5.

```
[2, 2, 3, 3, 4]
Mid point = 3
3 < 5 so we throw away the left half of the array

[3, 4]
Mid point = 3
3 < 5 so again, we throw away the left half

[4]
Only one element left, and it's not what we're looking for.
```

Moving onto the next element in the array, now we're looking for `6 - 2 = 4`.

```
[2, 3, 3, 4]
Mid point = 3
3 < 4 so we throw away the left of the array

[3, 4]
Mid point = 3 
3 < 4 so again, we throw away the left half

[4]
Only one element left, but this time it is the number we're looking for!
```

And like the previous approach we have our answer.

The time complexity for a binary search is `O(log n)`. However, in the worst case scenario we would still need to
perform the search for each item in the array, so this approach is also `O(n log n)`. I would still consider this a
better approach than the first one as the time to find the correct element with a binary search will be faster on
average, but there was one final approach I came up with that does a bit better.

### Final Approach
I'm not sure what the correct name for this approach is, but it combines attributes of the previous two and allows us
to solve this problem with a time complexity of `O(n)`, which was the best that I could find. This is fairly close to
the brute force approach, except this time we use a more intelligent way of iterating through the available pairs.

Rather than blindly trying every combination, this time we will start by checking the first item with the last item in
the array. Then if the sum of this pair is too low, we know that we can ignore the first element as it will never cause
a large enough result. Likewise, if the sum is too high, we can discard the last element. The result of this is a search
which converges inwards, reducing the amount of elements we need to check with each iteration.

```
[1, 2, 2, 3, 3, 4]
1 + 4 = 5
5 < 6 so we discard 1. It we use it in a sum with any other number in the array, it will never be large enough.

[2, 2, 3, 3, 4]
2 + 4 = 6
In just two attempts we have found the correct pair!
```

The way this approach continually reduces the work done in each iteration by discarding elements we know can't be
correct means that in a worst case scenario we will only need to iterate `n/2` times. Therefore, we can say this 
approach has a time complexity of `O(n)`. At this point I'm pretty satisfied with that, it looks like this is the right 
approach to take.


### Setup Testing
The next thing I like to do is to set up a handful of test cases, ensuring I have at least one to cover each edge case,
and ideally one with a large input. I'm not going to list all the ones I wrote for this, but here's a couple to get the
idea. I like to solve most of these problems with python, as it is fast to write, translates very closely to pseudocode 
and lets me focus more on the problem solving aspect of the challenge.

{% highlight python linenos %}
from solution import Solution

def test_example_1():
    nums = [2,7,11,15]
    target = 9

    solver = Solution()
    result = solver.twoSum(nums, target)

    assert result == [1,2]

def test_example_2_nums():
    nums = [1, 2]
    target = 3

    solver = Solution()
    result = solver.twoSum(nums, target)

    assert result == [1,2]

def test_long_arr_middle():
    nums = [1] * 100000
    nums = nums + [3, 7]
    nums = nums + [10] * 100000
    target = 10

    solver = Solution()
    result = solver.twoSum(nums, target)

    assert result == [100001, 100002]
{% endhighlight %}

### Solution
Once the test cases are set up, we can start writing the solution itself.

{% highlight python linenos %}
class Solution:
    def twoSum(self, numbers: list[int], target: int) -> list[int]:
        # List is ascending, therefore we can reduce the problem by converging inwards
        start = 0
        end = len(numbers) - 1

        # Scenario states there will always be exactly one solution, so this is fine
        while start < end:
            result = numbers[start] + numbers[end]
            if result == target:
                return [start + 1, end + 1]
            elif result < target:
                start = start + 1
            else:
                end = end - 1
{% endhighlight %}
